My name is Elena Nikolaevna Stanislavik.
I read courses in enterprise
economics, financial management,
investment design at the Graduate
School of Economics, the Academy
of Business Administration,
as well as in the training
system of professional
accountants of anti-crisis
managers within the MBA
program.
I actively engage in investment
consulting as an expert.
I work in the project finance
management of Intrastbank.
Today we will discuss with you the principles
of financial planning.
The importance and relevance of this
topic today in the epoch
of financial scandals, I do not doubt.
You want to learn how the actions
of financial managers can reduce to
zero the enterprise's achievements
in production, sales markets, in provision
or, vice versa, how to create money
from the air, skillfully managing
the turnover of assets, profitability,
optimizing the value of capital,
using the effects of leverage
and other professional
secrets.
Your business lacks money, there is profit
in the reporting, and the account
is empty.
These are the problems that are addressed
by financial planning.
Financial planning is interesting,
useful and necessary.
Our video course, designed for executives
and managers, is designed
to instill sustainable planning
skills, including forecasting
the components of cash flows
and estimating expected
financial outcomes.
The course is aimed at solving
emerging problems in business.
The methodology of training implies
that the students are already
familiar with the basic terms of financial
management or can refer to the votary
and recommended literature.
During the lectures, I use
the term “enterprise” most often,
considering it the most general
and thus emphasizing
the entrepreneurial component
of any company, firm, corporation,
organization or financial
institution.
The lecture consists of 10 blocks.
I hope that by formulating target
parameters, statistical and tactical
tasks, we can place the emphasis
and highlight the red thread
of planning processes.
During the presentation of the theoretical
foundations of financial planning,
examples from practice, logical
schemes, graphs will be given.
The approximate ratio of theory
to practice will be 10.5 minutes
per training block.
For independent work, you use
an electronic textbook, which contains
text of lectures and a
workbook with tasks.
Please complete the task after listening
to each block of the video courses.
First of all, I ask you to present
your business as an open system,
linked to other enterprises
in the procurement and sales markets
by the movement of goods, the
flow of goods.
Flows of goods determine the main functions
of the enterprise – provision, manufacture
of goods or provision of services
and sales.
For the movement of goods, counter-
cash flows, cash flow, cash
flows, cash flows are
necessary.
Money flows also link enterprises
with the state and the capital
market.
Thus, enterprises in financial
management represent
as a subject of financial
relations surrounded by the financial
sphere.
Input and output cash
flows, we will call cash
flows or receipts and
outflows or payments.
I ask you, looking at this scheme
of financial flows, try to formulate
the financial goal, financial outcome,
financial conditions of the company'
s prosperity, conditions of enrichment
or conditions of growth
of business value.
The answer to “profit” is not quite
correct, I will explain by example.
Suppose the company's revenue for
a certain period amounted to 1000
monetary units, current costs - 800
monetary units, including the amortization
clearance of 100 monetary
units.
Then the balance sheet profit
of the enterprise is 200 monetary units,
the income tax at the rate of 24% - 48
monetary units, and the enterprise
account will remain 162 units of
net profit and 100 monetary units
of amortization clearances.
These indicators in the reporting
appeared with one accounting
policy variant.
But if we use another accounting
policy and apply, for example,
accelerated depreciation by doubling
the depreciation clearance,
then we see that despite the
fact that the profit in the reporting
decreases, but the tax on profit
decreases, therefore, the
account of the enterprise
as a financial result,
results in a large amount.
The financial purpose of the division
and the task of financial planning
is to coordinate the flow of financial
resources and outflows or to
provide liquidity in a broad sense.
Accordingly, financial
result, net cash flow or
net cash income is net cash
flow in translation.
The difference between these indicators
profit and net monetary income is based
on the division of the concept of
results, revenues, receipts and expenses,
expenses, payments.
Income and payments, flow and
outflow are the main objects
of financial planning.
Profit and cash flow are different
analyses, interrelated but not duplicating
parameters.
So, profit in the reporting does not
always mean the presence of money on
the account in the business pocket.
For example, Walmart, ahead
of its maximum growth
in the 70s and 80s, had a
constant negative free
cash flow.
Sam Walton opened the new
branch at such a rate that current
turnover was lacking for financing,
but the profitability in the new
retail houses was on average 25%,
which was much higher than the company's
weighted average capital price.
Thus, the negative net cash
flow was actually hidden
success.
The company's shareholder return at
that time was the highest in the world,
and Sam Walton became the richest
man in America.
The value added
to the Walmart network
rose from $30 million
in the 1980s to $528
million in 1990.
So, we have clarified the salt
of activity in light of the concept
of cash flows and we can say that
to increase the value of a business,
you need to know exactly when
and how much money will be needed
to perform the assigned
tasks, when and how much
will be received.
That is what financial
planning is doing.
Planning is a part of the management
process in the company.
This is conscious anticipation
of actions, comparison of different development
options, determination of goals,
ways and conditions for achieving
goals, modeling of results of activities,
search for favorable opportunities
to create conditions for
tomorrow.
Strategic planning begins
with the question of what we
want to and where we are.
This catalog of requirements and gives
the answer to the question what
we want to, with key parameters for
tactical development.
Accordingly, financial planning
can be considered as the process
of setting strategic
parameters of activity
and control of their implementation.
Today, in the conditions
of uncertainty, instability of the situation,
it is necessary to review the planned
tasks, to clarify the level of indicators
and normatives, which is the
essence of monitoring.
Today, two control and monitoring
units are in the first
place.
Financial planning is an integral
part of the overall planning process
in the enterprise.
Financial planning uses information
of the marketing plan, the
production plan, the mission
and the overall strategy.
The main tool of planning
is analysis.
In financial planning, respectively,
use the results of financial
analysis, analysis of
data of accounting reports.
The scheme of cash flow planning
considered in the previous block
allows a new look at the
place of the financial block in
the system of balanced indicators.
This is not some isolated area,
finance is imposed on all operational
processes.
Financial planning permeates,
links into a single link
marketing, personnel and
production planning.
The essence of financial planning is
that we need to calculate all the
components of the flow and outflow
of the financial asset, to
estimate the cash flow.
Financial planning takes into account
external and internal parameters.
External parameters include the volume
of demand and supply of goods, prices
of products and resources, the system
of settlements between suppliers
and consumers, credit
terms, the procedure
for taxation and other factors.
Internal planning parameters, such
as business scale, determine
the production capacity and,
accordingly, the quantity
of products produced and services
provided.
The level of technology of the organization
of operational processes determines
the cost and prices of products.
The level of management is expressed in
the effectiveness of business activity.
Planning types can be divided
by different classification
features into operational,
current and forecasting.
According to the time horizon of
planning, respectively, they
are short-term, medium-term and
can be divided by different signs
of classification into operational,
current and forecasting.
Accordingly, these types of
planning differ in different degrees
of flexibility.
Operational planning is carried
out by the lower management,
current middle management and
strategic planning is carried
out by the senior management.
As we have said, planning is
inseparable from controlling,
so every type of planning
involves establishing
certain indicators.
Forecasting establishes general
strategic parameters, such
as the market value of the
enterprise, capital structure,
weighted average value
of capital, economic
added value.
Current planning based on these
strategic indicators calculates
financial coefficients.
Finally, the maximum
detail is made in operational
planning, when individual indicators
are established, understandable
on any lower control
link.
According to the content of planning,
for example, planning the creation
of a new enterprise, or planning the
development, expansion of the business
of the existing enterprise.
According to the directions of planning,
the technique of polarisation can
be distinguished, distinguished, there
are forms of planning from top to bottom,
from bottom to top or counter-planning.
Thus, we and Valma tried
to link together the problem of
business value growth and such
control parameters as capital
price, target capital structure
and financing rules.
The essence of financial planning
consists in calculating
all components of the flow and
outflow of funds.
Therefore, internal and external conditions
must be taken into account.
External planning parameters include,
as you can see on the slide, the
volume of demand and supply of goods,
prices for products and services,
the system of settlements between
enterprises, the terms
of lending, the procedure for taxation.
Internal planning parameters are
primarily the scale of the business,
which determines the
production capacity and
the quantity of goods or services
produced.
The level of technology and organization
of production processes determine
the cost and prices of goods.
The level of management determines
the performance of the performance indicators.
These external and internal
parameters affect the income
and expenses of the enterprise,
the cash flow and outflows.
Planning is pushed back and leads
to a certain set, a systematized
set of key parameters
of activity, to the planned
indicators.
In general, we can say that financial
planning is a process, and a
financial plan is a set of documents,
on the basis of which the planned
financial indicators
of activity are calculated.
Types of financial planning
are divided into three
main groups: forecasting,
current planning and
operational planning,
respectively, which differ
by the horizon of planning.
Long-term perspective is forecasting,
medium-term is engaged
in planning and operational
is limited to a
short-term period.
The degree of detail for each type
of planning is its own,
the most amplified indicators are
inherent in strategic planning.
Current planning more detailed
calculates the performance indicators,
and the maximum detail
is inherent in operational planning.
In addition to these features, current
operational and forward-looking
planning differ in the volume and completeness
of information, flexibility.
Different levels of management
are involved in different types of planning.
Operational planning is the lower
management, current planning is
carried out by the middle management,
and strategic parameters determine
the top management.
Indicators that are
established during planning
as a result of planning,
according to the results of
forecasting include the market value
of the enterprise, the structure
of capital, added value.
Current financial planning leads
to a certain set of financial
coefficients.
Operational planning clarifies
and identifies individual
activity indicators, such as the
financial cycle, which we will
consider in the next blocks.
In terms of planning, we can
talk about planning an
existing enterprise, about
planning its development, or
we create a new enterprise,
develop investment projects.
Planning techniques can be from
top to bottom, from bottom to top,
or more often use mixed counterplanning.
The distinction between long-term and
short-term planning, as you can see,
implies not only different planning
horizons, but also different composition
of target parameters.
Strategic financial decisions about
investments, financing, mergers
and acquisitions are controlled
by economic value added,
by the target structure of capital,
by the weighted average
value of capital, and
the tactic is to ensure
financial balance.
Particular attention in planning should
be paid to the compliance of financial
and management parameters of
activity, as the financial sphere
of the enterprise is inseparably
connected with the production
sphere, with the operational
processes, with the real
processes of exchange.
And financial indicators do not exist
on their own, but depend on management
decisions in the field of
procurement and sales.
Understand the strategic parameters
of financial planning.
That is, we are talking about a long-
term financial plan, which embodies
the decision of managers, and the
investment is necessary to implement
the adopted strategy of value
growth of the business, and about
the ways of financing.
These investment and financing decisions
use the price of capital as
a benchmark for comparing
alternatives and the target
structure of capital as
a parameter.
In these decisions, the price of
capital is used as a benchmark
for comparing alternatives.
Since the price of capital increases with
the increase of the share of borrowed funds,
the task of management is to choose
the target structure of capital.
The target structure depends
on several factors.
For example, the asset structure.
More intensely used loans are
those enterprises that have properties
suitable for collateral.
The growth rate.
Fast-growing companies are more
intensely using external funding.
In this case, the cost of placing shares
is usually higher than the cost of borrowing.
and profitability.
The next factor.
Companies with high return
on invested capital prefer
to handle their own funds.
They have a sufficient accumulated tribe to profit.
Capital structure planning refers
to the area of financial leverage,
the categories of which are used
in decisions about whether to take
loans or not, that is, the structure
of sources of financing.
Leverage is the highest
skill in financial management.
It is with the help of leverage
that financial managers decide the fate
of the company, how it will
develop in terms of profitability
and risk.
Rentability and risk are polar motives
for decision making.
High yields are usually
achieved at the cost of
risky actions.
Therefore, in order to minimize risk,
as managers are usually inclined
to take risks, shareholders require
a certain return on their
invested capital, so certain
rules of financing have been developed.
These rules can be easily
controlled by the balance sheet
of any enterprise.
Comparison of assets and liabilities
of the enterprise.
Look at the slide.
We have the main components
we need now, which we need to
pay attention to in the assets
and liabilities of the enterprise.
The financing rules, the so-called
gold rule of financing, describe
the requirements for the
horizontal structure of the
balance sheet.
In other words, the positions of assets and
positions of liabilities are compared.
According to this rule, it is
necessary that long-
term asset positions that the
entity will use for long
periods of time be covered
by long-term financing sources.
and short.
Own capital must cover non-
currency assets, this is a narrow,
strict rule of financing.
The extended rule of financing
allows you to compare
all long-term sources
of financing, i.e. equity
and borrowed capital, with
non-currency assets.
The golden rule of financing is
called the “golden rule” in German
financial management.
But the requirement for the
vertical structure of capital
is that own capital,
own sources of financing
exceed borrowed capital.
This is the so-called 50-50
rule, the favorite American
rule of financing.
As Americans say, the essence of
this rule is to limit this rule
is aimed at the risk sharing between
the investor-owner and the investor-loan.
The owner has no right to expect
that by contributing
some small own capital,
he can get a significant
loan.
The rule says that 50-50 conditions
are necessary.
It is in theory.
In fact, the deviation of the share
of equity in the balance sheet
from the critical level, i.e.
equity may be less than
50% due to the discrepancy of
the market balance sheet
value of the business.
In addition, a low
share of equity can
be afforded by firms with
a stable and predictable
money supply, such
as retail, banking.
In addition, if we take the statistics
of the enterprise, look at what we actually
have, as the enterprise solved its
problems of investment, financing,
we will see that in the vast majority
of enterprises, for example,
in Germany, the reporting
rate does not exceed 25%.
We see that the share of own capital,
in addition, depends on the scale
of the business.
The more turnover, the greater the
share of own capital.
These rules can be
controlled, in addition to
comparing the balance sheet positions
as such, by calculating
special analytical coefficients.
Please look at the main rates
that correspond to the
funding rules.
The Golden Rule of Finance.
The coefficient of coverage of
non-currency assets by own capital,
the coefficient of assets
by own capital, the coefficient
of maneuverability
of own capital and the
coefficients of financial stability.
These rates are calculated from the
data of the report and are
the main condition for obtaining
new loans.
Their regulatory value, usually
iris and lomates Each bank
chooses its favorite
coefficient and focuses on
this coefficient.
We see that, in principle, these
coefficients duplicate each other, they
are interrelated.
It is enough to choose one
of the factors and control
its normative value.
Thus, the output parameters of financial
forecasting, strategic financial
planning and the basis for
the next stage, for current
planning, are the amount, the
amount of investment that determines
the structure of assets,
sources of financing and,
accordingly, the structure
of capital-passive,
profit accumulation
and net cash flow.
We will now consider with you
the tactics of financial planning.
Tactics are developed as a response
to the question of what we need
to do in our company to implement
the strategy.
And as a response we set the
task of current financial planning
– ensuring financial balance.
Please look at the
next slide.
Figuratively, in the form of weights, the financial
balance is depicted.
This is a state that allows the
development of the enterprise
to ensure the achievement
of the objectives, to balance
between two components, between
the desire for profitability and
the avoidance of risk, between
profitability and liquidity.
We see in the center of the
slide the cornerstone – the conditions
for ensuring financial balance.
These conditions form decisions,
strategic decisions, in the process of
forward-looking planning, which
are resolved.
Investment and financing decisions.
That is, financial balance is
based on the balance structure
of capital, on financial stability.
We remember the rules of
financing, and it is compliance
with these rules that determines our
financial sustainability.
Financial sustainability creates conditions
for a balance between liquidity
and profitability.
Financial stability is the ability
of the enterprise to maintain independence
when changes in the financial
markets, to maintain independence
from creditors, and to
maintain independence.
Financial stability is our rule of
50-50, and the corresponding coefficients,
which can be calculated
by the company's forecast balance
sheet, by the results
of strategic planning.
This is the financial activity
rate, or sometimes called the shoulder
of the financial leverage,
the financial dependence
rate, the level of own capital.
You see, by the scheme of calculations
all these indicators are interrelated,
and all based on the
rule of equity must exceed
borrowed capital.
For example, an enterprise can
be considered absolutely
stable, hypothetically, it is
rare to find such an enterprise
in life, an enterprise that
uses only its own asset, which
has no borrowing funds
at all.
Normal financial sustainability is
compliance with the rules of financing.
Own and borrowed
funds are used equally.
Instable financial position,
if the entity uses additional,
unreasonable sources to cover
part of the inventories.
And critical, finally, financial
situation, when the enterprise
has unpaid loans, outstanding
debts, the enterprise
is insolvent.
Our slide is shifting, liquidity
falls on this picture.
In general, liquidity is a
rather problematic category, both
in theory and in practice.
Theoretically, this concept
is considered in a broad and narrow
sense, in a broad sense.
Liquidity is in line with
cash flow.
We talked about this at the very
beginning, representing a
financial enterprise in
terms of cash flow.
From this point of view, liquidity
can be identified with financial sustainability.
Long-term liquidity, structural
liquidity - liquidity
that is obtained as a result
of financing decisions.
On the other hand, liquidity is often
understood as something close to solvency.
Liquidity is current, as a condition
for ensuring solvency, I
suggest you consider.
Well, another concept is liquidity
in terms of current asset
turnover.
It is the ability of assets
to transform in the process
of turnover of assets
and to transform into absolutely
liquid assets, cash.
The problem of liquidity indicators is
related to the fact that in practice
there is always a question about their
regulatory level.
Which company is good
in terms of liquidity?
And attempts to introduce some common
concepts, rules, coefficients equal
to all, they are, of course, unsustainable.
Liquidity is a characteristic
that depends largely
on the industry
of the enterprise.
And, of course, the requirement
for the current liquidity ratio, which
should exceed two, it, of course,
does not withstand any criticism,
we have spoken a lot about it,
but, at the extreme, so far,
it is the only financial regulation
official that exists.
And, of course, a disruption
of financial balance, a breakdown
in one direction or the other,
can lead to risky critical
situations, insolvency, insolvency
or bankruptcy.
In general, I would like to draw your attention,
you have already listened, apparently,
these courses in other topics of financial
management, here, for financial planning,
it is important for us to understand
that, in principle, the concept of
financial stability and liquidity, they
are, in economic essence, unified and
interrelated, and characterize,
resulting from compliance with
the rules of financing, link between
the structure of assets and the
structure of liabilities.
The degree of insolvency of
the enterprise is a narrower
concept, and it can
be controlled for the absence
of money on the enterprise account,
for default debts.
In our realities, the critical
period of delay in payments is 3
months.
Under the bankruptcy law,
in this sad case, the
enterprise may be as a debtor
responsible for its costs,
including financial planning.
It could be an air case
against him.
These indicators – financial
stability, liquidity, regulatory
capacity – are needed for
financial planning as limiting
factors of risk.
On the opposite side of the weights
we have indicators of efficiency,
profitability, profitability and turnover.
Or, for example, if
the company is taking an aggressive
policy to increase
its market share.
Such a goal is real.
Tasks are interesting and necessary.
They plan to increase production
volumes under this strategy,
plan additional investments
in production capacities.
In the event of changes in the market
situation, for example, some
shocks, shifts, a decrease
in solvency demand and the
inability to sell products
in planned volumes.
There are losses due to the operation
leverage.
Another risky situation
is that the enterprise
uses additional loans to
ensure this planned growth
in sales.
Additional loans can lead to
loss of financial stability
due to the effect of the financial
leverage.
High profitability of assets.
Another goal.
The purpose of profitability, the purpose of ensuring
the effectiveness of activities.
This can be achieved by minimizing
stocks.
Minimum stock, they are full of breakdowns.
At some point, we may not have
enough money to buy a new
batch of goods.
We may not have components
in the warehouse for production
launch.
Or even, if we have a new customer,
we will somehow meet his demand
and provide his products,
which we do not have in
stock at the moment.
We lose the product.
Thus, we can schematically
imagine that current financial
planning should provide aggregates,
as a parameter of operational
efficiency, profitability,
turning on one side,
as you see on the slide,
and financial stability,
liquidity
and solvency.
And all this, of course, is aimed at increasing
the market value of the company.
Now, after we have dismantled
such bases, the parameters of
current planning, I will ask you
to look at the accounts of your company.
The form of reporting, form 1 and
2, public reporting, when you should
always have them at hand,
you can get them.
From that point of view.
What is the focus on financial
sustainability and liquidity?
Isn't there now, as you know the
parameters, no threat of non-payability?
Well, a more complete analysis will
allow you to identify problem
areas and set the task of
changing tactics, to mark the
regulatory level So, friends, we
have considered strategic
planning parameters, planning tactics,
and now we move to operational
planning and consider the
parameters of operational management.
This is the parameter of the
financial cycle.
The financial cycle is the
period of cash circulation,
the time during which money is
withdrawn from circulation.
This is the time between the outflow of
funds and the influx of funds.
On the slide you see the components of
the financial cycle and see that the
financial cycle is loaded onto the operating
cycle in connection with the fact that
we may receive a deferred payment
for providing us with resources.
The financial cycle requires
optimization.
Maximum reduction in
the financial cycle is the main
increase in the cost of a business
for lower levels of management,
but of course there are
limits.
We cannot reduce it to infinity.
Therefore, we need to
observe certain norms, parameters
in the activities of
the lower management, which
are bound to financial
activity, but are clear
and understandable
to each producer.
Well, for example, we will consider
these norms in the range of the
main components of activity - procurement,
production, operational
sphere and sales.
With re-acquisition, such a norm
is the rate of stocks in days.
This indicator is identical to the
periodicity of supply.
The inventory rate is the days
for which we create a stock to
provide its necessary minimum
but sufficient level for
the time interval between one
and the other supply.
This is a management norm,
understandable in
the field of logistical support.
In the financial sphere, it represents
in the form of stock value and
is formed as a result of
a certain delay in payments that
we receive for the supply of resources.
The next sphere of activity is
the operational sphere, current
activities, production for
production companies.
The most important norm of operational
management is the duration of the production
cycle, the time interval between the moment
of launching the product into production
and the moment of receipt of the
finished products to the warehouse.
The financial indicator
of the corresponding duration of
the production cycle is the
cost of unfinished production
of the NPP.
The shorter this cycle, the
more efficiently organized
the production activity of the enterprise.
In the field of sales, the standard of inventory
of finished products is an important
operational standard of management.
The finished product is stored
in the warehouse for some
time, inevitably.
For each company there is a
certain average period,
characteristic of this
industry.
On the other hand, in the financial
sphere we have debit debt,
which is formed in connection
with delayed payments.
The financial measure of the inventory
of finished products is the cost
of the inventory of finished products.
These norms form, let's look
again the scheme, the duration
of the financial cycle.
For example, how these indicators
work in the framework of planning.
If we have planned according
to the parameters of the annual
plan, the current plan, the duration
of the financial cycle is 30 days for all components.
In fact, after six months, the conditions
of sale deteriorated.
And payments for our products will
be received for a few days,
let's say 10 days later.
From a financial point of view, this
means the threat of liquidity collapse.
That is, we have a layer of time
that needs to be closed with something.
Or capital, but these extreme measures are undesirable.
Or it is necessary to put the
task before the production
units and to push some
norms at other stages.
For example, to put a task before technologists,
before the organizers of production,
to stretch the duration
of the manufacturing
process, the duration of
the production processes.
If this does not work, then you
will have to take additional
advantages.
Naturally, it carries additional costs.
A major problem of operational
management money management is related
to the field of handling
the instability of payments.
Especially if the company has
some seasonality, instability
of production.
Companies that work on contracts.
For example, for construction
companies that are active
in the summer period.
They have money in their accounts from
August to December.
They will be used for new
projects next autumn.
As a result, cash gaps are
formed, which you need
to provide, plan the coverage
of cash gaps, receive
additional loans.
Well, I hope you have already
calculated the duration of
your company's financial cycle.
This is a situation where
the financial cycle is negative.
What does this mean?
This is the dream of any financial manager.
This is how big supermarkets work.
The condition is a half-year deferral
of payments for the delivery of products.
This is a common condition for the largest
supermarket chains.
As a result, look, please,
from the financial cycle, they
have only one problem left
– inventory management.
And for this purpose, the inventory
isined at the regulatory level
and sales are carried out from
excess inventories at low, we
can say, dump prices.
So this expression and
stereotype can you buy
cheap, good, quality things.
I am in the era of deficit.
Today we already know what can be
where, in those companies that
know how to manage their financial cycle.
Please, I will ask you on the scheme
to put the duration of the
component adopted by your company,
calculate the operational and
financial cycle.
Something can and needs to be changed.
I hope that the delay in purchasing
goods that your suppliers provide
you, the delay in delivering
resources, exceeds your delay
that you deliver to buyers and
customers for your product
and services.
If not, you can immediately say that
the success of planning will
most likely be unsuccessful.
I also picked up for you, they
are in the context, examples
of financial cycle management
in Metro Cash & Carry, IBM, Ford,
General Motors and others.
and wonder.